So now that I have given you a
quick overview of Java futures
as a concept, as an
analogy, and as an API,
let's start talking about how
to visualize the use of Java
futures in action.
So a Java asynchronous call
immediately returns a future
and then continues to run the
computation asynchronously
in a background thread.
So this goes back to the
example we talked about before.
You can make an asynchronous
call, get a future back,
the call keeps running.
You can make another
asynchronous call,
get a future right
back, the call
keeps running, and
so on and so forth.
And then at some point,
you've got a bunch of futures,
and you have to decide
what to do with them.
One way to do this-- one way to
initiate an asynchronous call
in Java is to use the submit
method defined by the executor
service interface.
So assuming you've got an
implementation of the executor
service like a
ThreadPoolExecutor or so on,
you can go ahead and submit
an asynchronous call in Java.
So when a call is
submitted, what happens
is that it has to run
in the thread pool.
So let's assume for
sake of argument
that we have created
a thread pool.
So here's a little
snippet of code
where we're going to use
the executor's utility
class to create a thread pool
where we're going to have
a maximum number of threads--
let's say 4 just for fun--
and we get back a reference
to an executor service object.
We can then use that executor
service object reference
to submit a task.
And in this particular
example, the task
is going to be a
callable, and we're
going to submit the task to
run in one of the threads
in the background of the fixed
size worker threads thread
pool for the thread
pool executors.
You can see the code below.
We call submit.
We pass in a task.
What we get back immediately is
a future, which under the hood
is implemented by a class in
Java called a future task.
But all we care
about right now is
we've got a future
back for this thing.
And then the computation
that we have submitted
can run in the
background thread.
So as you can see
the computation
that we submitted
was this lambda
callable, which will multiply
two big fractions together
and return a result. So
that'll be chunking away
in the background.
Now when that asynchronous
call completes,
the future will be
triggered, and the result
will be available
to a client, who
can obtain it by calling get.
And there's a couple of
different approaches here.
You can either call get and
just block as I show here,
which means that we'll
wait until the call is
either finished or it
fails, and we can also
call get in the way that will
be either timed or polled.
So depending on what
the value of n is,
we'll either return
right away if we get--
if the future's complete--
if it's triggered,
the asynchronous
competition is done.
We'll get a result.
Otherwise, we
get a null if the value of n 0.
Otherwise, we'll wait
up to that many seconds
or that many milliseconds or
that many microseconds in order
for the call to finish.
One of the key characteristics,
of course, of this
is that computations may
complete in a different order
than the asynchronous
calls were actually made.
And that's where
things get tricky.
And when we talk a little
further about futures,
you'll see that
there's some dark sides
to using futures and trying
to efficiently handle out
of order completions gets hard
with the classic Java futures
model.
So just keep that in
the back your head
as we talk through the
rest of the examples.